# Software prefetching
[Full source][v6-rust]

In this version we will attempt to take advantage of vacant CPU execution ports by inserting prefetch instructions to reduce average memory access latency in the performance critical loop.

The motivation behind this idea is explained in the [reference materials][ppc-v5-asm].
Note that `vpermpd` and `vpermilpd` use same execution ports as `vperm2f128` and `vpermilps`, so the reasoning holds also for `clang` and `rustc`.

## Implementation

We won't be making much changes from [`v5`][self-v5] since we only want to insert 2 `prefetcht0` instructions in the innermost loop.
`prefetcht0` uses the strongest locality hint T0, which requests the data to be loaded into all cache levels.
The instruction is provided in the same Intel intrinsics crate we have been using for inserting SIMD instructions, where it is defined as [`_mm_prefetch`][rust-prefetch-docs].
Since we will be using it only for prefetching addresses containing `f32x8`s, we might as well wrap it into a helper function and put it in our SIMD helper module:
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/tools/src/simd.rs:prefetch}}
```
The function takes as arguments the memory address of an `f32x8`, for which we want to request a cache line fetch using locality T0.
In C, `p.offset(offset)` would basically be equal to `p + offset`.
We need the `unsafe` expression both for using `_mm_prefetch` intrinsic and `p.offset`, but we shouldn't have to worry about memory safety so much here since we only need the offset address, the pointer will not be dereferenced.

Now that we have our prefetch-helper, we can add it to our [`v5`][self-v5] implementation.
First, we get a pair of `f32x8` pointers to the current row pair `vd_row` and `vt_row`:
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v6_prefetch/src/spilling.rs:step_row_block_init}}
```
`PREFETCH_LENGTH = 20` is the amount of `f32x8` addresses we want to look ahead, and it was chosen empirically in the reference implementation.

We'll insert two prefetch-hints for addresses 20 elements ahead of `d0` and `t0` in the beginning of the innermost loop:
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v6_prefetch/src/spilling.rs:step_row_block_inner}}
```

That's about it, let's run the benchmarks.
C++ version available [here][v6-cpp].

Implementation | Compiler | Time (s) | IPC
:------|:---------|:---------|:---------------
C++ `v6` | `gcc 7.4.0-1ubuntu1` | 2.10 | 3.20
C++ `v6` | `clang 6.0.0-1ubuntu2` | 2.33 | 2.25
Rust `v6` | `rustc 1.38.0-nightly` | 2.67 | 2.77

Something is not right, the Rust implementation became slower compared to the [previous][self-v5] version.

Let's look at the assembly.

### `gcc`
```x86asm
{{#include asm/v6_cpp_gcc.asm}}
```
There are two prefetch-hints `prefetcht0`, placed `0x280` bytes ahead of the current loop indexes in registers `rdx` and `rax`.
This equals 20 `f32x8` vectors, because each `f32x8` is 32 bytes and `0x280/32 = 20`, as we wanted.

### `clang`
```x86asm
{{#include asm/v6_cpp_clang.asm}}
```

### `rustc`
```x86asm
{{#include asm/v6_rs_spilling.asm}}
```
We can see two prefetch instructions with locality hint T0, but for some reason there is also pretty bad register spilling.
This behaviour seems a bit odd, since the only thing we changed in the inner loop from [`v5`][self-v5] was to add two prefetch instructions.
Also, we can see that after writing a register into memory, the same register is not used anywhere in the loop during that iteration.

Recall how we faced the same issue in [`v4`][self-v4], which we solved by unrolling the `tmp` results array into separate, mutable variables.
This seemed to encourage the compiler to keep the temporary results in registers for the duration of the loop, so let's do the same also here.

## Full `step_row_block` implementation
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v6_prefetch/src/lib.rs:step_row_block}}
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v6_prefetch/src/lib.rs:step_row_block_apply}}
```

### `rustc` without spilling
```x86asm
{{#include asm/v6_rs.asm}}
```

## Benchmark

Implementation | Compiler | Time (s) | IPC
:------|:---------|:---------|:---------------
C++ `v6` | `gcc 7.4.0-1ubuntu1` | 2.10 | 3.20
C++ `v6` | `clang 6.0.0-1ubuntu2` | 2.33 | 2.25
Rust `v6` | `rustc 1.38.0-nightly` | 2.16 | 3.23


{{#include LINKS.md}}
