# Cache reuse
[Full source][v7-rust]

In our final version, we will attempt to increase cache locality also for data from `vt`, by reading `f32x8` row pairs from `vd` and `vt` using a [Z-order curve][wiki-z-order] iteration pattern.
If you look at [this animation][ppc-cache2-animation], we will implement the last pattern to the right.
Please see the [reference materials][ppc-v7] for a detailed explanation.

## Implementation

This version will be an extension to [`v5`][self-v5], and we won't be using the prefetching hints seen in [`v6`][self-v6].
There won't be any changes to the performance critical loop or result extraction.
However, we need to rewrite most of the code to support the Z-order iteration pattern.
Our approach will be the same as in the reference implementation:
1. Create a 2-dimensional Z-order index pattern by sorting the interleaved bits of row index `i` and column index `j`.
2. Compute partial results in vertical stripes of 500 columns.
3. Extract final results from partial results.

### Preparation

We start by defining some constants.
We'll fix the width of all vertical stripes to 500 columns.
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:init}}
```

Then we create the 2-dimensional Z-order pattern for pairs of `i` and `j`.
We'll use the same trick as in the reference implementation, which is to use the [parallel deposit][intel-pdep-u32] intrinsic function for scattering the bits of `i` into odd indexed bits, `j` into even indexed bits, and `OR` the results.
We wrap it into a function `z_encode` and put it into our toolbox:
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/tools/src/lib.rs:z_encode}}
```
If `n` would always be a power of 2, there would be no need to handle edge cases, since `z_encode` would always return the correct `z`-index.
However, when `n` is not a power of 2, we must make sure to skip all `z`-indexes that are out of bounds.
We use the same approach as in the reference solution, which is to create a vector `row_pairs` containing 3-tuples `(z_encode(i, j), i, j)` and sort it by the `z`-index.
When we enumerate the sorted `row_pairs`, we get correct `z`-indexes that do not include out of bounds row and column indexes.
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:interleave}}
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:interleave_apply}}
```

Recall how we used an 8-by-8 `tmp` block in previous versions to store partial results.
In this version, we'll store a `tmp` block for every Z-order index pair `(i, j)` into `partial_results`.
By storing `tmp` blocks into `partial_results` for every index pair, we can fairly easily load and write into the correct `tmp` block when we process each vertical stripe of data.
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:init_stripe_data}}
```

### Computing results in vertical stripes

Now, we will compute all the results.
Note that we haven't initialized the values for `vd` and `vt` yet.
We'll do it inside the loop, one stripe at a time.
Here's a brief overview what happens during one pass over one stripe:
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:stripe_loop_head}}
        // ...
        // pack one stripe of vd and vt from d
        // ...
        // 1. load results from previous stripe
        // 2. compute results for this stripe
        // 3. save results for next stripe
    }

```
The actual computation is not very different from [`v5`][self-v5], except that we are processing `vd` and `vt` in stripes.
Also, we cannot extract results before we have processed all stripes, so each thread will load and save a `tmp` block from `partial_results` for every pair of indexes `i` and `j`.
After loading one stripe of `vd` and `vt` from `d`, we process them in Z-order using index pairs `(i, j)` from `row_pairs`.
If we enumerate `row_pairs`, we also get the index of each `tmp` block in `partial_results`, so we might as well zip `row_pairs` with `partial_results` to avoid using the `z`-indexes directly.
We apply `step_partial_block` in parallel such that each thread computes results for one `tmp` block at index `z` in `partial_results` and index pair `(i, j)` at index `z` in `row_pairs`:
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:stripe_loop_step_partial_block}}
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:stripe_loop_step_partial_block_apply}}
```

### Extracting results

After accumulating results over each vertical stripe, we need to extract all results from the partial results that are in Z-order.

First, let's replace the `z`-indexes in `row_pairs` with a linear index and sort `row_pairs` by `(i, j)` in order to get a mapping from `z` to the correct partial result.
This allows us to chunk `r` into rows indexed by `i`, and write all results to each row element at `j` by reading `partial_results` linearly.
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:replace_sort_key}}
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:replace_sort_key_apply}}
```
Now, `row_pairs` is ordered linearly, first by `i` then by `j`, such that the first element in each tuple element of `row_pairs` corresponds to the starting index of an 8-by-8 `tmp` block in `partial_results`.

We chunk `r` into 8-row blocks and read the `tmp` result blocks from `partial_results` and extract 64 `f32` results exactly as in [`v5`][self-v5].
```rust,no_run,noplaypen
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:set_z_order_result_block}}
{{#include ../../shortcut-comparison/src/rust/v7_cache_reuse/src/lib.rs:set_z_order_result_block_apply}}
```

## Benchmark

Implementation | Compiler | Time (s) | IPC
:------|:---------|:---------|:---------------
C++ `v7` | `gcc 7.4.0-1ubuntu1` | 2.04 | 2.94
C++ `v7` | `clang 6.0.0-1ubuntu2` | 2.16 | 2.20
Rust `v7` | `rustc 1.38.0-nightly` | 2.25 | 2.79

We managed to get a small improvement compared to the Rust program from [`v5`][self-v5], but not as much as in the C++ versions.
The performance critical loop is the same as in [`v5`][self-v5], which means we cannot search for answers in the assembly code, or at least not as easily as previously.
One possible performance bottleneck could be that we sort the Z-order indexes twice in the Rust program, while it is done only once in the C++ version.
Using a better approach for Z-order encoding and decoding might help reducing the running times.

{{#include LINKS.md}}
